feat: new extension `vike-react-styled-jsx` (#158)
vikejs/vike-react: packages/vike-react-styled-jsx/README.md

# `vike-react-styled-jsx`

[Installation](#installation)  
[Settings](#settings)  
[Version history](https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/blob/main/packages/vike-react-styled-jsx/CHANGELOG.md)  
[See also](#see-also)  

<br/>

Integrates [styled-jsx](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx) to your [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react) app.

## Installation

1. `npm install vike-react-styled-jsx styled-jsx`
2. Extend `+config.js`:
   ```js
   // pages/+config.js

   import vikeReact from "vike-react/config"
   import vikeReactStyledJsx from "vike-react-styled-jsx/config"

   export default {
     // ...
     extends: [vikeReact, vikeReactStyledJsx]
   }
   ```

3. Add the `styled-jsx`'s Babel plugin:
   ```js
   // vite.config.js
   import react from "@vitejs/plugin-react"
   import vike from "vike/plugin"
   
   export default {
     plugins: [
      vike(),
      react({
        babel: {

>           plugins: [["styled-jsx/babel"]],

Reviewer: Let's keep the style consistent and remove the trailing commas.

        },
      }),
    ],

>    };

Reviewer: Same here with the semicolon.

   ```

4. You can now use styled-jsx at any of your components.
   ```jsx
   function SomeComponent() {
     return (
       <div>
        <p>Only this paragraph will get the style.</p>
        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

> You can remove the styled-jsx SSR integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):
```

Reviewer: Friendly reminder. Intervention++.

# `vike-react-styled-jsx`

[Installation](#installation)  
[Settings](#settings)  
[Version history](https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/blob/main/packages/vike-react-styled-jsx/CHANGELOG.md)  
[See also](#see-also)  

<br/>

Integrates [styled-jsx](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx) to your [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react) app.

## Installation

1. `npm install vike-react-styled-jsx styled-jsx`
2. Extend `+config.js`:
   ```js
   // pages/+config.js

   import vikeReact from "vike-react/config"
   import vikeReactStyledJsx from "vike-react-styled-jsx/config"

   export default {
     // ...
     extends: [vikeReact, vikeReactStyledJsx]
   }
   ```

> 3. Add `styled-jsx/babel` to plugins in your babel configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Add `styled-jsx/babel` to `vite.config.js`:
```

   ```js
   // vite.config.js

>    import { defineConfig } from "vite"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   import { defineConfig } from "vite"
```

And remove it below.

   import react from "@vitejs/plugin-react"
   import vike from "vike/plugin"
   
   export default defineConfig({
     plugins: [
      vike(),
      react({
        babel: {
          plugins: [["styled-jsx/babel"]],
        },
      }),
    ],
   });
   ```

4. You can now use styled-jsx at any of your components.
   ```jsx
   function SomeComponent() {
     return (
       <div>

>         <p>only this paragraph will get the style :)</p>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        <p>Only this paragraph will get the style.</p>
```

        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

> `vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` that adds a [CSP nonce](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy) meta tag and injects the nonce into the style tag.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).
```
Intervention++

# `vike-react-styled-jsx`

[Installation](#installation)  
[Settings](#settings)  
[Version history](https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/blob/main/packages/vike-react-styled-jsx/CHANGELOG.md)  

> [What it does ?](#what-it-does)  

Reviewer: Let's remove ` ?`. It's a common practice for headings.

        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

<br/>

For full customization consider [ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

> [!NOTE]
> Consider making a [Pull Request before ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject#when-to-eject).

> ## What it does ?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## What it does
```

> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension automatically integrates `styled-jsx`'s SSR features under the hood, by creating a style registry, extracting the rendered styles, and injecting them during server-side rendering to avoid FOUC. Learn more in the [styled-jsx README > Server Side Rendering](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#server-side-rendering).  

Reviewer: Let's focus on a high-level what it does for the user, and not the technical details: the user doesn't and shouldn't have to care about these.

Let's just say something like "is about avoid FOUC. (It does so by collecting the styles of the page during SSR and injects them earlier, so that the page's style is applied before even hydration starts)".

Author: LGTM https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/pull/158/commits/e619490c6089ef2d218c2c3cff6d635d01d0ef8f ?

> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension automatically integrates `styled-jsx`'s SSR features under the hood to avoid FOUC. It does this by collecting the page's styles during SSR and injecting them earlier, ensuring that the styles are applied before hydration begins. Learn more in the [styled-jsx README > Server Side Rendering](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#server-side-rendering).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension allows you to use `styled-jsx` without [FOUC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_of_unstyled_content).

It collects the page's styles during SSR and injects them earlier in the HTML, ensuring that styles are applied early (before even hydration begins).

You can learn more at:
 - [Vike > CSS-in-JS > Collect styles](https://vike.dev/css-in-js#collect-styles)
 - [styled-jsx README > Server Side Rendering](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#server-side-rendering)
```

> To learn more about how the integration works, have a look at the source code which is small. For full control [consider ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

Reviewer: Let's avoid the "learn more" repetition.

Author: What about `explore` ? https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/pull/158/commits/a3cde20c57e78828a1bdf42b25546fd11f1bc056

Author: Okay https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/pull/158/commits/d6e15b53095e54be8789fc3a5ae506fb52827d71

   }
   ```

4. You can now use styled-jsx at any of your components.
   ```jsx
   function SomeComponent() {
     return (
       <div>
        <p>Only this paragraph will get the style.</p>
        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

You can remove the styled-jsx SSR integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

## What it does ?

> The `vite-react-styled-jsx` extension provides automatic integration of `styled-jsx`'s SSR capabilities with `vike-react`, making it easy to use `styled-jsx` for server-side rendering in your `vike-react` projects. What it does is:

Reviewer: Love it :dizzy:. Although let's keep it high level and remove the technical explanation below. Instead let's say:

> To learn more, have a look at the source code which is small. For full control [consider ejecting](#ejecting).

Reviewer: As for the high-level description, let's rewrite it. What the user wants to know is what functionality `vike-react-styled-jsx` is adding. So (among others?) the whole FOUC thing.

Btw. I'm curious: does `styled-jsx` work without `vike-react-styled-jsx`? Whether it's required or optional would be nice to mention. If it's required, let's write one sentence on why it is (if we don't know why then let's skip this explanation so that we don't waste time into digging `styled-jsx` internals).

Author: > does `styled-jsx` work without `vike-react-styled-jsx`?

Yes, but there will be FOUC if users don't use the Style Registry feature

1. It creates the registry in [onBeforeRenderHtml()](https://vike.dev/onBeforeRenderHtml) by calling the `styled-jsx`'s `createStyleRegistry()` function and stores the resulting registry in `pageContext.styledJsx.registry`.
   
2. It wraps your app with `styled-jsx`'s `<StyleRegistry>` component and passes the registry to it via the [+Wrapper](https://vike.dev/Wrapper) component.

3. It accesses the styles by calling `styled-jsx`'s `registry.styles()` and adds them to the `<head>` tags using [useConfig()](https://vike.dev/useConfig) in [onAfterRenderHtml()](https://vike.dev/onAfterRenderHtml).

<br/>

> For full customization consider [ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

Reviewer: I think it's better we keep this in `## Settings`.

Reviewer: Actually, how about a new section `## Eject` and then reference it at the end of `## settings`.

# `vike-react-styled-jsx`

[Installation](#installation)  
[Settings](#settings)  
[Version history](https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/blob/main/packages/vike-react-styled-jsx/CHANGELOG.md)  
[What it does](#what-it-does)  
[See also](#see-also)  

<br/>

> Integrates [styled-jsx](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx) to your [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react) app.

Reviewer: Should be before the TOC. Intervention++

## Installation

1. `npm install vike-react-styled-jsx styled-jsx`
2. Extend `+config.js`:
   ```js
   // pages/+config.js

   import vikeReact from "vike-react/config"
   import vikeReactStyledJsx from "vike-react-styled-jsx/config"

   export default {
     // ...
     extends: [vikeReact, vikeReactStyledJsx]
   }
   ```

3. Add `styled-jsx`'s Babel plugin:
   ```js
   // vite.config.js
   import react from "@vitejs/plugin-react"
   import vike from "vike/plugin"
   
   export default {
     plugins: [
      vike(),
      react({
        babel: {
          plugins: [["styled-jsx/babel"]]
        }
      })
    ]
   }
   ```

> 4. You can now use styled-jsx at any of your components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. You can now use `styled-jsx` at any of your components.
```

        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

<br/>

For full customization consider [ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

> [!NOTE]
> Consider making a [Pull Request before ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject#when-to-eject).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

<br/>

```
Intervention++

## What it does

The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension allows you to use `styled-jsx` without [FOUC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_of_unstyled_content).

It collects the page's styles during SSR and injects them earlier in the HTML, ensuring that styles are applied early (before even hydration begins).

You can learn more at:
 - [Vike > CSS-in-JS > Collect styles](https://vike.dev/css-in-js#collect-styles)
 - [styled-jsx README > Server Side Rendering](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#server-side-rendering)

> For more details, have a look at the source code, which is small. For full control [consider ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details, have a look at the source code of `vike-react-styled-jsx` (which is small). For full control [consider ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).
```

    ]
   }
   ```

4. You can now use `styled-jsx` at any of your components.
   ```jsx
   function SomeComponent() {
     return (
       <div>
        <p>Only this paragraph will get the style.</p>
        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

> <br/>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    ]
   }
   ```

4. You can now use `styled-jsx` at any of your components.
   ```jsx
   function SomeComponent() {
     return (
       <div>
        <p>Only this paragraph will get the style.</p>
        
        <style jsx>{`
          p {
            color: red;
          }
        `}</style>
       </div>
     )
   }
   ```

> [!NOTE]
> The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension requires [`vike-react`](https://vike.dev/vike-react).

<br/>

## Settings

`vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` to set the [CSP nonce for `styled-jsx`](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy).

> [!NOTE]
> You also need to set a `<meta property="csp-nonce" content={nonce} />` tag with the same nonce.
> See [Vike Docs > head-tags](https://vike.dev/head-tags).

```ts
// pages/+styledJsx.js
export { styledJsx }

import nanoid from 'nanoid'

const styledJsx = {
  nonce: Buffer.from(nanoid()).toString('base64') //ex: N2M0MDhkN2EtMmRkYi00MTExLWFhM2YtNDhkNTc4NGJhMjA3
}
```

You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

   }
   ```

> 3. Add `styled-jsx/babel` to plugins in your babel configuration:

Author: I don't think so, it's grammatically correct, isn't it ?

## Settings

> `vike-react-styled-jsx` provides a configuration `+styledJsx` that adds a [CSP nonce](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx?tab=readme-ov-file#content-security-policy) meta tag and injects the nonce into the style tag.

Reviewer: ```diff
- https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx?tab=readme-ov-file#content-security-policy
+ https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#content-security-policy
```

Author: Thanks

}
```

You can remove the `vike-react-styled-jsx` integration from [some of your pages](https://vike.dev/config#inheritance):

```js
// pages/about/+styledJsx.js

export const styledJsx = null
```

<br/>

For full customization consider [ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject).

> [!NOTE]
> Consider making a [Pull Request before ejecting](https://vike.dev/eject#when-to-eject).

## What it does ?

The `vike-react-styled-jsx` extension automatically integrates `styled-jsx`'s SSR capabilities, preventing FOUC and scoping style rendering during each SSR pass to ensure concurrency safety. This allows the generated styles to be compared when the client loads, avoiding duplicate styles.  

> To learn more, have a look at the source code which is small. For full control [consider ejecting](https://github.com/vikejs/vike-react/pull/158#ejecting).

Author: I'm not great at making sentences 😅 , but anyway, what do you think?

Author: I used words from the styled-jsx [README](https://github.com/vercel/styled-jsx#server-side-rendering), except for 'preventing FOUC.'

Reviewer: Let's first focus on content. Let's mention that it inject the styles generated upon SSR, in order to avoid FOUC.

> to ensure concurrency safety

This sounds (and is?) gibberish. Let's avoid this at all cost. Intervention += 3.

> This allows the generated styles to be compared when the client loads, avoiding duplicate styles.  

I think this is also inaccurate? Elaborate if it isn't. Please avoid this.

Reviewer: Ah, indeed I'm reading `to keep concurrent-safe` from their docs. Weird.

Let's still avoid mentioning things we aren't sure what it means.

We can add a "Learn More at ..." if we want.

What we know for sure is that it avoids FOUC, and it's the classical FOUC integration. Maybe we can also link to https://vike.dev/css-in-js. Let's also popoulate `## See also`.

Reviewer: Actually, I think I know what they mean. It's quite misleading and mentioning it doesn't add any value. Let's stick to the fundamentals we know about.

Author: Okay, I've updated the wording. Please take a look again 🙏
